#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
File System
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
File Concept
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OSes abstract from the physical properties of the storage devices they control
 to define a logical unit of storage, the 
\series bold
file
\series default
.
 A file is a named collection of related information recorded on the secondary
 or non volatile storage.
 It can contain text, numeric data, binary data, formatted and unformatted
 data to define audio clips, graphic images and so on.
 A file has a specific structure, which is determined by its creator.
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset


\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

For example, a 
\series bold
source 
\series default
file is a sequence of functions and high level logical constructs stored
 as text.
 An 
\series bold
object 
\series default
file is a sequence of bytes meant to depict actions and addresses, which
 can be understood by the linker.
 An 
\series bold
executable
\series default
 file is a binary section of data that is meant to be executed on the CPU
 to perform a specific task.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
File Attributes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When a file is created, for convenience it is given a human readable name
 by which it can be identified.
 The name of the file makes it independent of the user, process and the
 system which created it.
 Typically files store with them their 
\series bold
name
\series default
, 
\series bold
identifier
\series default
 (machine readable identifier), 
\series bold
type
\series default
, 
\series bold
location
\series default
, 
\series bold
size
\series default
, 
\series bold
access information
\series default
 and certain date time records for monitoring like 
\series bold
creation datetime
\series default
, 
\series bold
last modified datetime
\series default
 and 
\series bold
last used datetime
\series default
.
 Generally the name and the file identifier for a file is stored in the
 same directory as the file, through which other attributes may be located.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
File Operations
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
